--- Page 1 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
Cost-Based SQL Query Optimizer
Advanced Database Management — Computer Science (A & B), 4th Semester
Project 02 Manual | Languages: C or C++
1 Problem Statement
You will build a SQL query optimizer that answers the central question every real database engine has
to answer: given a SQL query that joins multiple tables and filters them with predicates, in what order
should the joins be performed and which rewrites should be applied first, to make the query run as fast
as possible? The same query has many possible execution plans — some run in milliseconds, others
take minutes — and the optimizer’s job is to pick a good one without trying them all.
This project differs from the simpler version that other classes assign in three specific ways. First,
the supported query subset includes joins of up to four tables, not just two; this is the size at which
join ordering starts to matter dramatically and where the optimizer’s choices are clearly visible in the
benchmark numbers. Second, the optimizer is driven by an actual cost model: it maintains catalog
statistics for every table and column (row counts, distinct values, value ranges) and uses standard
cardinality estimation formulas to predict how big each intermediate result will be. Third, the optimizer
applies a set of rewrite rules in addition to choosing a join order; you will implement four rules that any
production optimizer also implements, plus the Selinger-style dynamic programming algorithm for join
ordering, the same algorithm that has been at the core of System R, PostgreSQL, and DB2 since 1979.
The shape of the project is: a parser that accepts a small SQL subset, a catalog that holds table
statistics, a logical-plan representation, a rule-based rewriter that applies four cleanup transformations,
a join-order search that uses dynamic programming over a cost function, a materialized executor that
runs the chosen plan, and a benchmark that compares the optimizer’s chosen plans against several
baselines (no optimizer at all, rewrites only without join ordering, join ordering only without rewrites).
The benchmark is the headline deliverable: it makes the optimizer’s value visible by showing speedups
in the 100×to 1000×range on adversarial queries and quantifies the contribution of each component.
You are not building a complete SQL database. There are no transactions, no indexes, no concurrent
queries, and no SQL features beyond the supported subset (which is precisely defined in Section 5). The
executor is the same materialized model used in the simpler version of this project: each operator is a
function that takes a list of rows and returns a list of rows, with no Volcano iterators, no pipelining, and
no parallelism. The reason for keeping the executor simple is that the project is about the optimizer; a
sophisticated executor would compete for time without teaching anything new about query planning.
This project is one of the harder ones in Project 02. The difficulty is concentrated in two places:
cardinality estimation (cost models that produce wildly wrong estimates make the optimizer choose
worse plans than no optimization at all, and the chaos test will show this), and the join-ordering DP
(the algorithm is short but indexing into the bitmap of subsets needs to be exact). Plan time for
instrumenting your cost estimates against actual runtime sizes during development; this is what real
database engineers do, and your design document will require you to discuss your estimates’ accuracy.
2 What the Final Product Looks Like
When your project is complete, you can compile the binary, load the benchmark dataset, and watch the
optimizer make visibly different plan choices than the unoptimized baseline.
$ make
$ ./ qopt -- data ./ be nc hd ata
qopt : opened catalog with 4 tables
cu st om er s 10 ,000 rows ( id INT PK , name TEXT , country TEXT , age INT )
orders 500 ,000 rows ( id INT PK , c u s t o m e r _ i d INT , total DOUBLE ,
year INT , status TEXT )
l i n e _ i t e m s 2 ,000 ,000 rows ( order_id INT , p r o d u c t _ i d INT , qty INT ,
price DOUBLE )
products 50 ,000 rows ( id INT PK , name TEXT , category TEXT ,
s u p p l i e r _ i d INT )
1
--- Page 2 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
qopt : stats loaded for 4 tables , 16 columns
qopt > SELECT cu sto me rs . name , SUM ( l i n e _ i t e m s . qty * l i n e _ i t e m s . price )
FROM customers , orders , l i n e _ i t e m s
WHERE cus to me rs . id = orders . c u s t o m e r _ i d
AND orders . id = l i n e _ i t e m s . order_id
AND c us to me rs . country = ’PK ’
AND orders . year = 2024;
--- WITHOUT op ti miz er ( left - deep , FROM order , no rewrites ) ---
plan :
HashJoin ( orders . id = l i n e _ i t e m s . order_id )
HashJoin ( cu st ome rs . id = orders . c u s t o m e r _ i d )
Filter ( country = ’ PK ’ AND year =2024)
C r o s s P r o d u c t
SeqScan ( c us tom er s ) [10 K rows ]
SeqScan ( orders ) [500 K rows -> 5 B i n t e r m e d i a t e ]
SeqScan ( l i n e _ i t e m s )
es ti ma te d cost : 5 ,247 ,180 ,200
actual time : 12.83 seconds , 412 result rows
--- WITH op ti mi ze r ( rules + cost - based DP join ordering ) ---
plan :
HashJoin ( orders . id = l i n e _ i t e m s . order_id )
HashJoin ( cu st ome rs . id = orders . c u s t o m e r _ i d )
Filter ( country = ’ PK ’)
SeqScan ( c us tom er s ) [ est 41 rows , actual 39]
Filter ( year =2024)
SeqScan ( orders ) [ est 71 K rows , actual 71 K ]
SeqScan ( l i n e _ i t e m s ) [ reads on demand via hash probe ]
es ti ma te d cost : 2 ,840 ,120
actual time : 0.124 seconds , 412 result rows
speedup : 103.5 x
plan cost ratio : 1847 x
estimate error : cust 5% , orders 0.4% , joined 7%
qopt > \ stats
queries executed : 1
op ti mi ze r wins : 1 ( avg speedup 103.5 x )
average plan time : 2.1 ms
average exec time : 124 ms
The defining moment of this session is the side-by-side plan comparison. The unoptimized version
computes a 10K×500K cross product before filtering — 5 billion intermediate rows — because it
follows the FROM clause order naively. The optimized version filterscustomersdown to 41 rows
first (using the predicatecountry = ’PK’), then joins to a filteredorders(71K rows), then probes
line_itemsvia a hash join. The plan touches three orders of magnitude less data and runs three orders
of magnitude faster. The optimizer’s cost estimate (about 1800×better than the baseline) accurately
predicted that the new plan would be much better, and the runtime measurement confirms it.
3 Architectural Overview
The system has six components. Keep them strictly separated.
[ SQL query string ]
|
v
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+
| Parser | produces a logical plan tree
+ - - - - - - -+ - - - - - - -+
|
v
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+
2
--- Page 3 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
| Catalog | table schemas , row counts ,
| ( Section 6) | per - column s t a t i s t i c s
+ - - - - - - -+ - - - - - - -+
|
v
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+
| Rule | pr ed ica te pushdown ,
| rewriter | p r o j e c t i o n pushdown ,
| ( Section 7) | constant folding , join swap
+ - - - - - - -+ - - - - - - -+
|
v
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+
| Cost model | c a r d i n a l i t y + cost es ti ma te s
| ( Section 8) | using the catalog stats
+ - - - - - - -+ - - - - - - -+
|
v
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+
| Join - order | Selinger DP over subsets
| search | of base tables
| ( Section 9) |
+ - - - - - - -+ - - - - - - -+
|
v
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+
| Executor | m a t e r i a l i z e d operator model
| ( Section 10) | ( same as simpler version )
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+
The pipeline is strictly top to bottom: the parser produces a logical plan, the rewriter cleans it up,
the cost model and join-order search work together to choose a physical plan, and the executor runs
it. There are no back-edges. This is the textbook structure of every real query optimizer, just stripped
down.
4 The Supported SQL Subset
The grammar is precisely:
query := SELECT s e l e c t _ l i s t
FROM table ( , table ) *
[ WHERE pred ( AND pred ) *]
[ GROUP BY column ]
[ LIMIT integer ]
s e l e c t _ l i s t := * | expr ( , expr ) *
expr := column
| ag gr eg ate ( column )
| column op column ( e . g . , qty * price )
| literal
ag gr eg at e := SUM | COUNT | AVG | MIN | MAX
pred := column op literal ( e . g . , year = 2024)
| column op column ( e . g . , c us tom er s . id = orders . c u s t o m e r _ i d )
op := = | < | <= | > | >= | !=
Multiple tables in the FROM clause are joined: every pair of tables in the FROM produces a join, and
the join condition is whichever WHERE predicate compares columns from those two tables. Predicates
that compare a column to a literal (likeyear = 2024) are filters. Predicates withANDare independent;
ORis not supported. Subqueries, ORDER BY, HAVING, DISTINCT, and OUTER JOIN are all out of
scope.
The parser is a hand-written recursive-descent parser, the same shape as in the simpler version of this
project. It is about 250 lines of C and produces a small logical-plan tree of the form:
3
--- Page 4 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
L o g i c a l P l a n := Scan ( table )
| Filter ( pred , child )
| Join ( condition , left , right ) ( binary , hash join )
| Project ( exprs , child )
| GroupBy ( column , agg , child )
| Limit (n , child )
A query likeSELECT * FROM a, b WHERE a.x = b.y AND a.z > 10parses initially into something like
Project(*, Filter(a.x=b.y AND a.z>10, Join(true, Scan(a), Scan(b))))— a deliberately bad
starting plan with a no-condition join (effectively a cross product) and all predicates piled on top. The
optimizer’s job is to turn this into a good plan.
5 The Catalog and Statistics
Every real optimizer relies on a catalog of metadata about each table. For this project, the catalog
holds:
5.1 Per T able
•name: the table’s name.
•columns: an ordered list of (name, type) pairs.
•row_count: the number of rows in the table.
5.2 Per Column
•distinct_count: the number of distinct values in the column.
•min_valueandmax_value: the smallest and largest values seen (only meaningful for numeric
columns; for strings, leave them empty and use a fallback in the estimator).
•null_count: the number of NULL values. For this project, the data is null-free, so this is always 0;
the field exists for completeness.
These are the standard “base statistics” that every textbook cost model uses. They are deliberately
small; per-column histograms (which are vastly more accurate but harder to implement) are an explicit
bonus.
5.3 Building the Catalog
At startup, the engine reads each table’s CSV file and computes the statistics in a single pass. This
takes a few seconds for the benchmark dataset and produces a smallcatalog.jsonfile that is cached
for subsequent runs.
5.4 Why Statistics Matter
The cost model in Section 8 uses these statistics to estimate intermediate result sizes. A wrong estimate
produces a wrong cost, which makes the optimizer pick a wrong plan. The classic failure case: if the
optimizer thinks a filter is selective (will keep only 1% of rows) when it is actually unselective (keeps
50%), it will join the filtered table early in the plan, but the resulting intermediate is much bigger
than predicted and the rest of the plan is suboptimal. Your benchmark must include cases where your
estimates are accurate (the optimizer wins) and the design document must discuss any cases where they
are not.
6 The Rule Rewriter
Before doing any join-order search, the optimizer applies a fixed set of rewrite rules. Each rule is a
functionrule(plan) -> planthat returns a new plan with the rule applied as many times as it can
be (typically using a recursive walk of the tree). The optimizer applies rules in a fixed order until none
of them changes the plan further (a fixed point).
You will implement exactly four rules:
6.1 Predicate Pushdown
AFiltersitting on top of aJoincan be split, with each conjunct pushed down to whichever child can
evaluateit. Theconjuncta.country = ’PK’ontopofJoin(Scan(a), Scan(b))becomesJoin(Filter(a.country=’PK’,
Scan(a)), Scan(b)). Conjuncts that reference both sides of the join (the join condition itself, likea.id
4
--- Page 5 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
= b.customer_id) stay attached to the join.
This is the most important rewrite. It is the one that produces the dramatic speedups you saw in the
example session. Implementing it correctly requires distinguishing single-table conjuncts (push down)
from multi-table conjuncts (keep as the join condition or as a higher filter).
6.2 Projection Pushdown
AProjectthat selects only some columns can be pushed down through joins and filters, so that inter-
mediate results carry only the columns that downstream operators actually need.Project([a.name],
Join(Scan(a), Scan(b)))whereb’s columns are not used downstream becomesProject([a.name],
Join(Project([a.id, a.name], Scan(a)), Project([b.id], Scan(b))))—eachscannowonlyreads
the columns that participate in the join condition or the final select list.
Computing which columns are “needed” requires a small upward analysis: walk the tree, collecting the
set of column references in the SELECT list, in any predicate, and in every join condition. Push this
set as a constraint on each child. Test this rule carefully; an off-by-one will produce a plan that runs
but returns wrong data.
6.3 Constant F olding
A predicate like2024 = 2024or1 < 2can be evaluated at planning time and replaced withTRUEor
FALSE. ATRUEconjunct can be removed; aFALSEconjunct turns the entire filter into “no rows” (which
the optimizer can use to skip the rest of the plan entirely). Compound expressions like2024 = year
stay; only fully literal expressions fold.
This rule is small but valuable because it interacts with predicate pushdown: a predicate that reduces
toFALSEafter folding can prune entire branches. Test this case.
6.4 Join Input Swap
The hash join builds a hash table on its left input and probes with its right input. For a hash join to
be efficient, the build side should be the smaller relation. After cost estimation has run, the optimizer
can compare the estimated sizes of the two inputs and swap them if needed:Join(condition, left,
right)becomesJoin(condition, right, left)when the right is estimated to be smaller. This is a
physical-plan rewrite (it runs after the join-order search has chosen which tables to join, but before the
executor receives the plan).
6.5 Application Order
Apply the rules in this order:
1. Constant folding (resolves trivial predicates and possibly prunes branches).
2. Predicate pushdown (moves filters as low as possible).
3. Projection pushdown (limits column propagation).
4. Repeat 1–3 until no change (typically 1 or 2 iterations are enough).
5. Run the join-order search (Section 9), which produces a new plan tree.
6. Apply join input swap on the result based on cost estimates.
7 The Cost Model
The cost of a plan is computed bottom-up, with each operator contributing some cost based on the size
of its input(s). The convention this project uses is dimensionless: 1 unit per row read or written or
processed. Specifically:
7.1 Cardinality Estimation
Each operator emits some number of rows. The estimator computes this number based on the input
cardinalities and per-column statistics:
•Scan(t): emitst.row_countrows.
•Filter(pred, child): emitschild.cardinality * selectivity(pred)rows. Selectivity formu-
las for individual predicates:
•col = literal: 1
distinct_count(col). (If the literal is in the min–max range; if outside, selec-
tivity is 0.)
5
--- Page 6 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
•col != literal:1− 1
distinct_count(col).
•col < literalor similar range: estimate as the fraction of the min–max range that satisfies the
predicate. For integer columns, this is(literal−min)/(max−min), clamped to[0,1].
•Multiple conjuncts (AND): assume independence and multiply the selectivities. This is the standard
assumption and is often wrong for correlated columns, which is why real optimizers also have
multi-column statistics. For this project, the simple independence assumption is acceptable.
•Join(condition, left, right): for an equijoin onleft.col1 = right.col2, the standard esti-
mate is left.cardinality·right.cardinality
max(distinct_count(left.col1),distinct_count(right.col2)).
This is the standard System R formula. For a cross product (no condition), the cardinality is the
product. The output column statistics are inherited from the inputs (use the maximum of the two
distinct counts when both sides have a column with the same name).
•Project, Limit, GroupBy: simple to estimate; defer to the obvious formulas.
7.2 Cost F unction
For each operator, the cost is its input cardinalities plus its output cardinality, with a small multiplier
based on operator type:
•Scan(t):t.row_count(the cost of reading every row).
•Filter(pred, child):child.cost + child.cardinality(read every input row, decide).
•Join(cond, left, right)as a hash join:left.cost + right.cost + 2 * left.cardinality +
right.cardinality + output.cardinality. The build-side input is read twice (once to read it,
once to hash it); the probe-side is read once; the output is materialized.
•CrossProduct:left.cost + right.cost + left.cardinality * right.cardinality. This is in-
tentionally enormous to bias the optimizer away from cross products.
•Project, Limit, GroupBy:child.cost + child.cardinality.
The exact constants do not matter much; what matters is that the cost grows correctly with cardinality
so that bad plans (huge intermediate results) are correctly identified as expensive.
7.3 V alidating Estimates
Your design document must include an “estimate accuracy” table for the benchmark queries. For each
query, run the chosen plan, instrument the executor to record the actual cardinality of each intermediate
result, and compare to the estimated cardinality. Report the ratio. A ratio between 0.5 and 2 is good;
between 0.1 and 10 is acceptable; outside that range, your estimator is broken and you should investigate
before submitting.
8 Join-Order Search
This is the centerpiece of the project. Given a set ofnbase tables (after pushdown has filtered them)
and a set of join conditions between them, find the cheapest left-deep binary join tree that joins alln.
8.1 Why Left-Deep
A binary join tree isleft-deepif every join’s right input is a base table (a singleScanorFilter(Scan),
never anotherJoin). This restricts the search space dramatically: withntables, there aren!left-deep
trees, instead of(2(n−1))!
(n−1)! for general binary trees (which is 30 forn= 4rather than 120). Real optimizers
since System R use left-deep trees as the default because they pipeline well and the search is tractable.
For the base project, left-deep only. Bushy join trees (where the right side can also be a join) are a
bonus.
8.2 Selinger DP
The classic dynamic programming algorithm, due to Selinger et al. (System R, 1979). The state is a
subset of the base tables; the DP value is the cheapest left-deep plan that joins exactly that subset.
1. Represent each subset of thenbase tables as a bitmap ofnbits. Withn≤4(or up to 8 in the
bonus), anintorlongsuffices.
2. For every singleton subset{t}, the best plan isScan(t)(orFilter(p, Scan(t))if a predicate has
6
--- Page 7 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
been pushed down). Record its cost and cardinality.
3. For every subsetSof size≥2, in increasing order of size, iterate over every way to splitSinto a
non-empty left partLand a singleton right part{t}witht∈S. For each split:
1. Look up the best plan forL(already computed).
2. The right side is the base tabletwith any pushed-down filters.
3. If there is no join condition betweenLandt(no predicate connecting any table inLtot), this
split is a cross product; skip it unless this is the only option.
4. Otherwise, compute the cost ofHashJoin(condition, plan(L), Scan(t)).
The best plan forSis whichever split has the smallest cost.
4. The answer is the best plan for the full subset{t1, . . . , tn}.
The total work isO(n·2 n)to fill the table andO(n)per cell to enumerate splits, soO(n 2 ·2 n). For
n= 4, this is 64 operations; forn= 8, 16,384. The algorithm scales well up to about 12 tables, beyond
which memory becomes the limit. This project’s queries are limited ton≤4, so the search is essentially
instantaneous.
8.3 Connecting Back to the Plan T ree
After the DP completes, you have the cost of the cheapest plan but not the plan tree itself. Either store
the chosen split alongside each subset’s cost (so you can reconstruct the tree by walking back), or store
the actual best plan tree directly (more memory, simpler code). For four tables, both are fine.
9 The Executor
Same as the simpler version of this project: a materialized model in which each operator is a function
that takes input rows and returns output rows, with no state held between calls. The six operators
areScan, Filter, Project, CrossProduct, HashJoin, Limit, plusGroupBy(which is new for this
project).
GroupBy(col, agg, child)reads every row from the child, builds a hash map from the value ofcol
to a running aggregate state (sum + count for AVG; running min for MIN; etc.), and after the input is
exhausted, emits one row per group with the final aggregate value.
The executor is short — about 200 lines of code for all seven operators combined — and is the same
code you would write for the simpler version of this project. The reason is that the project is about the
optimizer; making the executor sophisticated would not change which plans the optimizer chooses.
10 Phase 1 — Parser, Catalog, and Executor
The goal of Phase 1 is an end-to-end query pipeline with no optimizer at all: queries parse into the
naive plan from Section 4, execute correctly, and produce results. The catalog and statistics are loaded
but not yet used.
Build:
•The hand-written SQL parser for the grammar in Section 5.
•The logical-plan tree representation.
•The catalog with table schemas and base statistics; load by scanning each CSV once at startup.
Cache tocatalog.json.
•The materialized executor with all seven operators.
•A naive plan builder that turns the parsed query into the unoptimized plan tree (FROM order, all
predicates filtered on top of cross products).
•Theqoptshell withLOAD,QUERY,EXPLAIN, and\statscommands.
At the end of Phase 1, every query in the benchmark suite should run and produce the right answer.
Two-table queries should be reasonably fast (a few seconds at worst); three- and four-table queries on
the benchmark dataset will be very slow because of the cross-product blowup. This is expected and is
what Phase 2 will fix.
7
--- Page 8 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
11 Phase 2 — The Rule Rewriter and the Cost Model
The goal of Phase 2 is to add the four rewrite rules and the cost model. Join-order search comes in
Phase 3.
Build:
•The four rules from Section 7: predicate pushdown, projection pushdown, constant folding, join input
swap. Each is a recursive function that walks the plan tree and returns a transformed tree.
•The fixed-point loop that applies them in order until none changes the plan.
•The cost model from Section 8: cardinality estimates for each operator, the cost function, and a
top-levelcost(plan)function.
•UpdateEXPLAINto print the chosen plan, its estimated cardinality at each operator, and the total
estimated cost.
At the end of Phase 2, two-table queries with selective filters should be dramatically faster than in Phase
1 because predicate pushdown filters the base tables before the join. Three- and four-table queries are
also faster, but join-order is still the FROM order; Phase 3 will fix that.
11.1 V alidation
For each two-table query in the benchmark, verify by hand that the chosen plan applies pushdown
correctly. Instrument the executor to log the actual cardinality at each operator. Compare to the
estimated cardinality. The ratio should be within 2×for selective predicates; if it is wildly off (10×or
more), there is a bug in the cost model.
12 Phase 3 — Join-Order Search and Benchmark
The goal of Phase 3 is the Selinger DP and the benchmark.
Build:
•The bitmap subset enumeration: iterate subsets in size order.
•The DP table: subset→(cost, cardinality, best plan).
•The split enumeration for each subset: try every singleton on the right.
•The connectedness check: skip splits that would produce a cross product.
•Plan reconstruction from the DP table.
•Integration: after rule rewriting, extract the set of base tables and join conditions from the plan, run
the DP, and replace the plan with the result.
•The benchmark suite (see below).
12.1 The Benchmark Dataset
A four-table schema (a small TPC-H-like sales scenario):
•customers(10,000 rows): id, name, country (24 distinct), age.
•orders(500,000 rows): id, customer_id, total, year (5 distinct), status.
•line_items(2,000,000 rows): order_id, product_id, qty, price.
•products(50,000 rows): id, name, category (87 distinct), supplier_id.
You generate this data deterministically from a fixed seed using a small CSV generator program. The
exact distributions are up to you, but document them.
12.2 The Benchmark Queries
Run these queries against four optimizer configurations: (1) no optimization, (2) rules only, (3) DP only
(no rules), (4) full optimizer (rules then DP). For each query and configuration, report the estimated
cost, the actual runtime, and the actual result cardinality. The required queries:
1.Q1 (two-table, selective):SELECT * FROM customers, orders WHERE customers.id = orders.customer_id
AND customers.country = ’PK’.Expected: fulloptimizerbeatsno-optimizerbyatleast100×; rules
alone get most of the win; DP alone helps less because there are only two tables.
2.Q2 (three-table, selective):the example from Section 2. Expected: full optimizer wins by at
least 100×; both rules and DP contribute.
8
--- Page 9 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
3.Q3 (four-table, selective):SELECT customers.name, products.name FROM customers, orders,
line_items, products WHERE customers.id = orders.customer_id AND orders.id = line_items.order_id
AND line_items.product_id = products.id AND customers.country = ’PK’ AND products.category
= ’Electronics’. Expected: full optimizer wins enormously; suboptimal join orders cause interme-
diate explosions.
4.Q4 (aggregation):SELECT customers.country, SUM(orders.total) FROM customers, orders
WHERE customers.id = orders.customer_id AND orders.year = 2024 GROUP BY customers.country.
Expected: rules win (predicate pushdown onyear).
5.Q5 (adversarial):a query specifically constructed to trip up a naive optimizer. Multiple selective
filters but on the join’s larger side, so that filtering early makes the difference. The full optimizer
should still win.
The benchmark output goes in the design document as a5×4table of speedups, plus a discussion of
which component (rules vs. DP) contributes how much per query.
12.3 Estimate Accuracy T able
For Q3 specifically (the four-table query), report the estimated and actual cardinality at every interme-
diate result in the chosen plan. This is the table real database engineers use to debug bad cost models,
and you will use it to identify any large estimation errors in your model.
13 Deliverables and Submission
13.1 What to Submit
A single zip archive containing:
•Complete source tree of the optimizer (qopt), the CSV data generator, and the benchmark driver.
•AMakefile(orCMakeLists.txt) that builds everything with one command on a recent Ubuntu
LTS.
•AREADME.mdwith build instructions, supported queries, and limitations.
•Adesign.pdfof at most 13 pages describing: the six-component architecture; the parser and gram-
mar; the catalog and statistics; each of the four rewrite rules with a worked example; the cardinality
estimation formulas including the System R join formula; the cost function; the Selinger DP algo-
rithm and how splits are enumerated; the executor’s seven operators; and a detailed discussion of
the benchmark results including the estimate-accuracy table for Q3.
•Abenchmark/directory with the data generator, the benchmark driver, and the output of your final
run.
•Atests/directory with unit tests for: the parser, each of the four rewrite rules in isolation, the
cardinality estimator (verify formulas against hand-computed examples), the Selinger DP (verify on
a 3-table example with known optimal plan), and end-to-end query correctness.
13.2 Archive Naming
Group[Number]_Project02_Optimizer.zip, for exampleGroup17_Project02_Optimizer.zip.
13.3 Demonstration
Each group will present a 25-minute live demonstration. First, a walkthrough of the optimizer pipeline
using the design document, with particular attention to the Selinger DP. Second, a live execution of the
benchmark, with the instructor free to type new queries on the spot and inspect the chosen plans via
EXPLAIN. Third, a short oral examination in which each group member will be asked to explain, without
notes, a specific component, with particular focus on the cost model formulas (especially the System R
join cardinality formula) and on why predicate pushdown is correct (why pushing a filter through a join
does not change the result). All group members must be present.
14 Bonus Opportunities
Each independent. Up to 20 percentage points total.
14.1 Bushy Join T rees (up to 5%)
The base project uses left-deep trees only. Extend the DP to consider bushy trees: for each subsetS,
instead of splitting intoL∪ {t}, enumerate all splitsL∪Rwhere bothLandRare non-empty subsets of
9
--- Page 10 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
S. The search space and runtime grow significantly, but bushy trees can be much better than left-deep
when intermediate results are unbalanced. Demonstrate at least one query where bushy beats left-deep
by a measurable margin.
14.2 Histograms for Range Selectivity (up to 10%)
Replace the simple min–max range estimate for range predicates with equi-depth histograms. Each
numeric column gets a histogram of, say, 32 buckets, where each bucket holds approximately the same
number of rows. Range selectivity is then computed by summing the buckets that fall within the range.
This dramatically improves accuracy on skewed distributions. The benchmark must include a query
with a skewed distribution where histograms produce a noticeably better plan than the base estimator.
14.3 Sort-Merge Join as an Alternative (up to 5%)
The base project uses hash join exclusively. Add sort-merge join as a second physical join algorithm.
The optimizer chooses between hash and sort-merge based on cost (sort-merge is typically better when
both inputs are already sorted on the join key, which can happen if a previous operator produced sorted
output). Discuss the cost model for sort-merge in the design document.
15 Constraints and Prohibitions
The F ollowing Will Result in Loss of Credit
•Use of any existing SQL parser, query optimizer, or database engine as a component of your
implementation. Includes SQLite, DuckDB, libpg_query, ANTLR-generated parsers for SQL,
and bindings.
•Use of any existing parser-generator (yacc, bison, ANTLR). The parser must be hand-written
recursive descent.
•Use of any existing binary serialization library for the catalog or any other state.
•Hard-coding the join order based on table size or schema knowledge instead of running the DP.
The optimizer must produce its plan via the cost model and search.
•Producing wrong query results. The chaos test will run every benchmark query and verify the
result against an independent reference (the unoptimized baseline). Plans that produce wrong
rows fail the project.
•Use of Python at any layer, including the data generator and the benchmark driver. Tests and
scripts must be in C, C++, shell, or JavaScript.
•Submitting code whose commit history shows large, infrequent commits.
16 Required Reading
1. Selinger, P. G., Astrahan, M. M., Chamberlin, D. D., Lorie, R. A., and Price, T. G. “Access Path
Selection in a Relational Database Management System.”ACM SIGMOD, 1979. The paper that
introduced cost-based join ordering. Sections 3 and 4 describe exactly the algorithm you will imple-
ment.Required reading before Phase 3; the manual you are reading now is a summary, but the
paper is the original.
2. Graefe, G. “Query Evaluation Techniques for Large Databases.”ACM Computing Surveys, 1993. A
comprehensive survey of query execution and optimization. Sections on join algorithms (4) and on
optimizer architecture (10) are the relevant ones. Reference material; skim it during Phases 1 and 2.
3. Ramakrishnan, R.andGehrke, J.Database Management Systems, 3rdedition, Chapter12(“Overview
of Query Evaluation”) and Chapter 14 (“A Typical Relational Query Optimizer”). The textbook
treatment of everything in this manual. Read 12.1 and 14.1 before Phase 1; 14.2–14.4 before Phase
3.
4. Leis, V. et al. “How Good Are Query Optimizers, Really?”Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
2015. A modern empirical study of how cardinality estimation errors propagate through plans.
Optional but illuminating; explains why your cost model’s accuracy matters so much.
5. Pavlo, A.CMU 15-445 Database Systems. Lectures 12–14 cover query execution; lectures 14–16
cover optimization. Freely available on the CMU course website.
10
--- Page 11 ---
Project 02Cost-Based Query Optimizer
Penalty Structure
•Missing documentation: –10%
•Security vulnerabilities: –5% per issue
•Poor code quality: –5% to –15%
•Academic integrity violations: Zero grade
Contact & Support
Teaching Assistants:
Jalal Ahmed:bscs23134@itu.edu.pk
Khadijah Farooqi:bscs23128@itu.edu.pk
Office Hours:Monday & Thursday,
11:30 AM – 2:30 PM
11